MEDIKIOSK  ·  SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE V2
The Conversational
History-Taking Engine
A revised, implementation-grade architecture for Module
A (dynamic history-taking) and Module B (document
intelligence), built around a macro-FSM derived from
Macleod’s clinical history framework, with a toggleable
AYUSH assessment layer and an explicit account of how
STT, TTS, the LLM, and the dialogue state machine are
wired together at runtime.
Supersedes: AI-generated research draft (“Generated by Kimi”), v1
Scope: Module A (Conversational History Engine) and Module B (Document Digitization) —
with a critique of v1 and revised recommendations for Modules C/D where they intersect
Date: 27 August 2026
Status: Design reference for build planning — not yet clinically or regulatorily validated
0 Scope & how this document is organized
This is not a rewrite from zero. The prior research draft got the macro-level system
philosophy right — a three-layer ingestion/intelligence/integration pipeline, an edge/
hybrid-cloud deployment split, and a genuinely solid FHIR R4 / ABDM resource-
mapping table that should be kept largely as-is. What it does not do is answer the
question that actually determines whether this product works: how, mechanically,
does the system decide what to ask next, in a way that is safe, auditable,
and doesn’t collapse into either a rigid questionnaire or an unpredictable
free-running chatbot? Sections 2–5 answer that in full. Section 7 does the same for
document extraction. Section 6 covers the AYUSH toggle you asked for. Appendix A is
a line-by-line critique of the prior draft's specific claims.
Section
Content
1
Design philosophy — why a single end-to-end LLM conversation is the wrong
architecture, and the three-tier alternative
2
The macro-FSM — states derived from Macleod's history-taking framework,
transitions, interrupts
3
The meso layer — complaint-driven acronym templates (SOCRATES, and others)
inside the HPI state
4
The micro layer — the actual dynamic-questioning mechanism: slot filling,
opportunistic extraction, guarded generation
5
Runtime integration — how STT, TTS, the LLM, and the FSM are wired together turn
by turn, and where each component physically runs
6
AYUSH mode as a gated configuration, not a patient-facing toggle — and a clinical
correction to what belongs in it
7
Document extraction pipeline — what to keep from v1, what to simplify, and how it
merges into the same patient record
8
The unified patient-record schema that ties every layer together
9
Red-flag / safety architecture — making the three layers in v1 actually resolve
disagreements safely
10
Revised build sequence
Appendix
A
Claim-by-claim critique of the v1 research draft
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 2 / 19
1 Design philosophy
The instinctive way to build "an AI that talks to the patient and takes a history" is one large
LLM conversation loop: feed it the transcript so far, ask it to decide what to say next. This
fails for a clinical-grade product for a specific, demonstrated reason, not a hypothetical one
— when a general-purpose LLM is left to freely drive a diagnostic interview against a rule/
graph-driven engine doing the same job, the free-running model reliably asks fewer
questions and omits clinically relevant ones, because it optimizes for a plausible-sounding
conversation, not for interview completeness. That is precisely the failure mode you cannot
afford in an OPD intake tool a physician is going to trust.
CORE PRINCIPLE
Separate what to ask from how to say it. A deterministic, auditable policy (the FSM +
ontology) decides the next piece of clinical information needed. The LLM's only jobs are (a)
turning that decision into a natural, correctly-translated sentence, and (b) turning the
patient's free-form answer back into structured data. The LLM never decides clinical
branching on its own.
This single decision is what makes the rest of the document possible. It resolves the "how
do I stop this from being a rigid form" worry (the LLM keeps it feeling conversational and
lets patients answer multiple things at once) and the "how do I stop this from hallucinating
or missing things" worry (the policy layer is a small, testable, hand-authored artifact you
can unit-test against clinical vignettes, the same way the CareRoute-style adaptive
symptom checkers are evaluated against standardized vignette sets before release).
Three tiers implement this, each solving a different-sized version of the same problem:
Tier
Answers
Mechanism
Why not one FSM for
everything
Macro (§2)
Which section of the history
are we in?
A literal, hand-authored
FSM — small state
count (~10),
deterministic
transitions
N/A — this is exactly
the regime where a real
FSM works: few states,
no combinatorial blow-
up
Meso (§3)
Given the chief complaint,
which structured template
applies?
A classifier + template
library (SOCRATES,
others)
The branching depends
on content (which
complaint), not just
position — a template
registry scales better
than encoding every
complaint as FSM
states
Micro (§4)
Within a template, what's
the next question, and how
Slot-filling frame +
guarded LLM I/O
The "state" here is the
entire accumulated set
of answers, not a
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 3 / 19
do we fill slots from natural
speech?
discrete position —
modeling every
combination as FSM
states is
combinatorially
infeasible
This maps directly onto your instinct: yes, a macro FSM for section-level structure is exactly
right, and it's the piece the prior draft never actually specified (it drew "State Machine" as
one box in a diagram with no state list). The nuance is that the FSM should stop at the
macro level — trying to push it down into question-by-question branching within a section
is where it breaks.
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 4 / 19
2 The macro-FSM — Macleod-derived section
states
Macleod's Clinical Examination — the standard reference for how a structured history is
organized — sequences a history as: presenting complaint → history of presenting
complaint (pain, associated symptoms, effects on lifestyle) → past history → drug history
(including allergies) → family history → social history/lifestyle → systematic enquiry (review
of systems). This is already what v1's section list (CC, HPI, PMH, PSH, DH, FH, SH, ROS)
approximates — the useful step is formalizing it as an explicit state graph with real
transition and interrupt logic, since that's what actually governs the patient-facing flow.
INIT → CHIEF_COMPLAINT → HPI → PMH → PSH → DRUG_ALLERGY → FAMILY_HX → SOCIAL_HX → ROS
                                                                                    │
                                    ┌── clinic_mode includes "ayush" ? ─────────────┤
                                    │ yes                                      no  │
                                    ▼                                               │
                          AYUSH_ASSESSMENT                                         │
                         (composite state, §6 —                                    │
                          config flag, never a                                     │
                          patient-facing toggle)                                   │
                                    │                                               │
                                    └──────────────────┬────────────────────────────┘
                                                        ▼
                                              DOCUMENT_SCAN (Module B)
                                                        ▼
                                             SUMMARY_CONFIRMATION
                                                        ▼
                                       COMPLETE  →  push to HIS/ABDM
  INIT covers language, ABHA auth, consent.  CHIEF_COMPLAINT feeds the meso-layer template
  selection (§3).  PMH/PSH/DRUG_ALLERGY/FAMILY_HX/SOCIAL_HX/ROS each load a checklist +
  voice-elaboration template appropriate to that section.
  Global interrupts, available from every state:
   [red flag detected]  →  REDFLAG_INTERRUPT  →  EMERGENCY_PROTOCOL (bypass queue, page triage)
   [patient taps Help]  →  STAFF_ASSIST (pause; resume the same state on return)
   [patient taps Back]  →  previous state (re-open its slot set for edits)
Transition rule
Advance to the next state when the active meso-
template (§3) reports all required slots filled or
the patient explicitly signals "nothing else" on an
optional slot. Each state can also be entered
with some slots pre-filled from document
extraction (§7) or a prior ABHA record — the FSM
skips asking anything already known with high
confidence, and instead runs a lightweight
confirm-only pass ("Our records show you're on
Amlodipine — still taking it?").
Why these are safe as a literal FSM
Ten-ish states, transitions are almost entirely
linear-with-skips, and every transition is
triggered by one condition (template complete /
explicit skip / interrupt). There is no per-question
branching modeled here — that's deliberately
pushed down to §3/§4. This is the difference
between a maintainable FSM and the
combinatorial one that breaks.
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 5 / 19
3 The meso layer — complaint-driven templates
inside HPI
When the macro-FSM enters HPI , it hands off to a template selector. The chief complaint
(from CC, spoken or tapped) is classified into a category, and that category loads an
ordered slot template. This is where your acronym instinct plugs in — SOCRATES isn't a
special case, it's one entry in a template registry:
Complaint category
Template
Slots (ordered by clinical priority)
Pain (any site)
SOCRATES
Site → Onset → Character → Radiation →
Associations → Timing → Exacerbating/
Relieving → Severity
General / constitutional
symptom (fatigue, weight
loss, weakness)
DOPS (your template —
Duration, Onset,
Progression, Severity)
Duration → Onset → Progression →
Severity, extended with a small
associations checklist per symptom
Fever
Fever-specific
Duration → Pattern (continuous/
intermittent) → Peak temp → Chills/rigors
→ Associated symptoms → Travel/
exposure correlation
Respiratory (cough,
breathlessness)
Respiratory
Duration → Sputum (yes/no, color) →
Hemoptysis → Breathlessness grade →
Wheeze → Chest pain co-occurrence
GI (pain, bowel change)
GI
SOCRATES core + bowel habit → blood in
stool/vomit → appetite → weight change
ON YOUR ACRONYM CHOICE
DOPS is a fine, minimal general-symptom template — the point of this architecture is that it's
just another row in the registry, not a special code path. Two named alternatives worth
benchmarking it against as you build out coverage: OPQRST (Onset, Provocation/Palliation,
Quality, Region/Radiation, Severity, Time) and OLDCARTS (Onset, Location, Duration,
Character, Aggravating, Relieving, Timing, Severity) — both are more widely taught than a
from-scratch acronym, which matters when you eventually want physicians to trust the
summary without re-deriving your naming scheme. Worth a quick internal comparison on real
transcripts before you commit.
Classifying the chief complaint into a category is an LLM/embedding classification
call, not a keyword match — patients say "seene mein dard" or "my chest hurts and I feel
weak" and the classifier has to map free text (in any of the supported languages) onto one
of a fixed, small category list. This is a narrow, well-bounded LLM task (classification into a
closed set, not open generation) and is exactly the kind of thing that should be unit-tested
against a labeled vignette set before launch, the same way adaptive symptom-checkers
are validated against standardized vignette batteries before release.
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 6 / 19
4 The micro layer — the actual dynamic-
questioning mechanism
This is the piece you flagged as the real problem, so here is the turn-by-turn mechanics in
full.
TURN LOOP  (repeats until the active template's required slots are filled)
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 1. Dialogue Manager   → next_slot = highest unfilled-slot priority in the
                          active template (red-flag-relevant slots weighted
                          first — e.g. for chest pain, radiation + dyspnea
                          are asked before exacerbating/relieving factors)
 2. Dialogue Manager   → emits a STRUCTURED instruction {slot_id, options,
                          prior_context} — never raw text
 3. LLM  (constrained) → phrases + translates into the patient's language
                          — output schema allows ONLY question text + a
                          ≤1-sentence acknowledgement of the prior answer
 4. TTS + Touch UI     → speaks the question; renders synced option buttons
                          drawn from the SAME slot spec (voice and touch
                          can never show/say different things)
 5. Patient            → responds by voice and/or tap
 6. ASR (if voice)     → transcript
 7. LLM (extraction)   → fills the asked slot AND any other open slots the
                          patient mentioned opportunistically in the same
                          utterance (this is what makes it feel dynamic,
                          not the LLM choosing what to ask)
 8. Safety Watchdog    → re-scans the FULL slot set for red-flag
                          combinations — runs every turn, independent of
                          steps 1–7 (see §9)
 9. Confirm-back       → ONLY if the slot is red-flag-relevant OR
                          extraction confidence < threshold — not after
                          every single answer (see Appendix A, item 6)
10. Loop to step 1, or transition the macro-FSM (§2) if the template's
    required slots are all filled or explicitly skipped
The guardrail that makes step 3 and step 7 safe
The LLM is never given a free-text box to decide what to ask or how to interpret an answer
— it is bound to a fixed input/output contract at every call. This is the concrete mechanism,
not a policy statement:
// Dialogue Manager → LLM   (phrasing request, step 2/3)
{
  "action": "ask_slot",
  "slot_id": "hpi.radiation",
  "slot_prompt": "Does the pain spread anywhere else?",
  "options": ["No spread", "Left arm", "Jaw", "Back", "Other"],
  "language": "hi-IN",
  "prior_context": {"chief_complaint": "chest pain", "onset": "yesterday morning"}
}
// Allowed LLM output — nothing else is accepted by the schema:
{
  "spoken_text": "...",
  "ack_of_prior_answer": "..."          // optional, max 1 sentence
}
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 7 / 19
// Patient utterance → LLM   (extraction request, step 7)
{
  "action": "extract_slots",
  "template": "SOCRATES",
  "open_slots": ["radiation","associations","timing","severity"],
  "transcript": "yeah it goes into my left arm and i feel a bit breathless"
}
// Allowed LLM output:
{
  "filled_slots": [
    {"slot_id": "radiation", "value": "left_arm",
     "confidence": 0.94, "source": "direct"},
    {"slot_id": "associations.dyspnea", "value": true,
     "confidence": 0.81, "source": "opportunistic"}
  ],
  "unrecognized_mention": null   // free text goes here if it doesn't map to
                                 // any open slot — logged for the physician,
                                 // never silently discarded or force-fit
}
WHERE V1'S "LLM ROUTER" BOX NEEDED THIS
The prior draft's dialogue-manager diagram had a "LLM Router (Adaptive)" box producing a
"Generative Follow-up (LLM-based, constrained)" branch, but never specified the constraint.
Without the schema above, "LLM decides when to generate a follow-up" is exactly the free-
running behavior that under-elicits information in practice. The schema is the actual
deliverable that box was gesturing at.
Handling the genuinely novel case
When unrecognized_mention comes back non-null — the patient said something the
template didn't anticipate — the dialogue manager may issue exactly one bounded
clarifying question (same schema as above, with action: "clarify" ), never a diagnostic or
advisory statement. The raw mention is always preserved verbatim in a clinician_note
field on the patient record (§8) regardless of whether it's resolved, so nothing volunteered
by the patient is ever silently dropped.
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 8 / 19
5 Runtime integration — wiring STT, TTS, the
LLM, and the FSM together
Four moving parts, four different latency/placement requirements. The mistake to avoid is
treating this as one service — each component should be independently swappable and
independently scaled.
Component
Runs where
Why
Voice
orchestration
VAD, turn-taking,
barge-in, audio
streaming
Kiosk edge (thin
layer)
This is generic real-time plumbing — use an existing
voice-agent framework (LiveKit Agents or Pipecat)
rather than hand-rolling it; both provide streaming
VAD, interruption handling, and overlapped stage
execution out of the box, which is what gets you a
sub-second, non-robotic turn cadence
ASR / TTS
Hospital-local
server or cloud
API — decision
needed, see
callout below
Bhashini's ASR/TTS is API-based (MeitY-hosted);
AI4Bharat's IndicConformer/IndicTTS are open-weight
and self-hostable
Dialogue Manager
macro-FSM + meso
templates + micro slot-
filling + safety
watchdog
Hospital-local
server (private
cloud/on-prem)
This is a fast rule/lookup service (milliseconds), not a
generation step — it belongs with the rest of the
"heavy AI" tier in v1's hybrid deployment model, on
the hospital's own network, not on the literal kiosk
box
LLM (phrasing /
extraction)
Hospital-local GPU
server
Called every turn — needs to be fast and cheap. Can
be a smaller/distilled model than the one used for the
once-per-visit Module C summary, since its job here is
narrow (schema-bound phrasing and extraction, not
open generation)
FLAG FROM V1 THAT NEEDS A DECISION, NOT A DEFAULT
The prior draft states both "Bhashini is the mandatory primary choice" for ASR/TTS and "no
patient data leaves the hospital network" as a DPDP compliance point. These are in tension:
Bhashini's APIs are hosted by MeitY, so raw voice audio sent to Bhashini leaves the hospital's
private network. Neither choice is wrong, but the document needs to pick one and be explicit
about it in the consent language: 
Option A — Bhashini as primary: keep the "government-aligned, free, 22-language"
advantages, but explicitly disclose in the consent flow that voice audio is processed by the
national Bhashini platform, and confirm Bhashini's data-handling terms satisfy your DPDP
Data Fiduciary obligations before launch.
Option B — self-hosted AI4Bharat models as primary: IndicConformer (ASR) and
Indic Parler-TTS run on your own GPU server, so the "no data leaves the network" claim
becomes literally true; Bhashini becomes a fallback for languages you haven't self-hosted
• 
• 
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 9 / 19
yet. More infrastructure to own, but a cleaner compliance story for a first government-
hospital deployment.
Recommend B for the pilot, A as the scale-out fallback once you have a signed data-
processing agreement in place.
ONE TURN, END TO END
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
Patient speaks
   │  (kiosk edge: VAD detects utterance boundary, streams audio)
   ▼
ASR  ──stream partial hypotheses──▶  transcript
   │
   ▼
LLM extraction call (§4 schema)  ──▶  filled slots  ──▶  patient record (§8)
   │                                                         │
   ▼                                                         ▼
Safety Watchdog scan (§9, every turn) ─────────────▶ [if red flag] REDFLAG_INTERRUPT
   │  (no red flag)
   ▼
Dialogue Manager picks next_slot (§4 step 1)
   │
   ▼
LLM phrasing call (§4 schema)  ──▶  question text (patient's language)
   │
   ▼
TTS  ──stream audio──▶  kiosk playback     +     Touch UI renders synced options
Design toward the industry-standard conversational latency budget (roughly 300 ms perceived
response time is the baseline modern voice-agent frameworks target) as a north star, but treat it as
something to measure on your actual hospital network and Bhashini/self-hosted ASR round-trip —
not something to assume. Streaming partial ASR results into the extraction step before the patient
finishes speaking, and streaming TTS audio out before the full sentence is synthesized, is what gets
overlapped-stage latency down; running each stage sequentially and waiting for full completion at
each step is the most common way teams accidentally build a system that feels laggy.
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 10 / 19
6 AYUSH mode as a gated configuration
Your requirement — available only for AYUSH clinics — should not be implemented as a
button the patient can tap. Ayurvedic constitutional assessment is only clinically
meaningful when ordered by an Ayurveda physician for that department's workflow; letting
a patient opt into it themselves invites confusion, wasted interview time, and a summary
the receiving physician didn't ask for.
What actually belongs inside AYUSH_ASSESSMENT — and what
doesn't
v1 lists both Dashavidha Pariksha and Ashtavidha Pariksha under Module A (patient-facing
conversation). Half of that is right and half of it is a clinical category error worth catching
before it's built:
AYUSH_ASSESSMENT   (composite macro-state, only loaded when clinic_mode includes "ayush")
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
  Dashavidha Pariksha — PATIENT-REPORTABLE, belongs in the conversational engine:
   ├─ Prakriti        constitution — Vata/Pitta/Kapha questionnaire (structured, self-report)
   ├─ Vikriti          current dosha imbalance
   ├─ Sara             tissue quality — self-reported proxy questions
   ├─ Samhanana        body build — partly self-report, partly camera/manual anthropometry
   ├─ Pramana          body measurements — via kiosk camera/manual entry, NOT spoken history
   ├─ Satmya           environmental adaptability
   ├─ Sattva           psychological strength
   ├─ Ahara Shakti      digestive capacity / Agni — self-reportable
   ├─ Vyayama Shakti    exercise tolerance — self-reportable
   └─ Vaya             chronological vs biological age
  Ashtavidha Pariksha — NOT patient-reportable, should NOT be in the kiosk interview:
Decision: mode is derived from the encounter context, not selected by the patient
clinic_mode is a property of the session, resolved at STEP 1 (identification) from one of, in
priority order:
Appointment/token record — if the patient checked in against an OPD department
code fetched from the HIS (e.g. "AYUSH-OPD-03"), the kiosk resolves clinic_mode from a
department_config lookup table automatically. This is the primary path for hospitals
where kiosks are shared across departments.
Kiosk-level default — a kiosk physically deployed inside an Ayurveda OPD wing can
carry a fixed default in its device config, for hospitals that dedicate hardware per
department.
Staff-assisted override — for walk-ins with no prior appointment record, front-desk staff
select the department at token issuance (already in v1's staff-assist fallback for other
cases); this, not the patient, sets the flag.
The patient never sees a mode toggle. If a hospital genuinely wants patient-initiated integrative
care (both systems, patient's choice), that's a product decision to make deliberately later, gated
behind physician sign-off on the intake protocol — not a default.
1. 
2. 
3. 
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 11 / 19
   ✗ Nadi (pulse)        — requires a physician's finger on the patient's wrist
   ✗ Jihva (tongue)      — requires direct visual examination by the physician
   ✗ Sparsha (touch)     — requires physician palpation
   ✗ Drik (vision/gaze)  — requires physician observation
   ✗ Shabda (voice quality), Akriti (general appearance) — observational, physician-performed
   → Route these to a physician-facing structured EXAMINATION FORM in Module C / the consultation
     screen, filled in by the doctor during the visit — not asked of the patient at the kiosk.
WHY THIS MATTERS BEYOND CORRECTNESS
Putting "does your pulse feel weak?" or "describe your tongue" to a patient at a kiosk
produces noisy, clinically useless self-report data — patients can't reliably assess their own
pulse quality — and it also burns interview time on questions that will simply be re-done by
the physician anyway. Removing Ashtavidha Pariksha from Module A shortens the AYUSH
interview and makes the summary more trustworthy, not less comprehensive, since that data
still gets captured — just in the right place, by the right person.
Sara through Vaya are still a meaningfully large questionnaire (roughly 40–60 discrete data
points across the ten categories in typical Ayurvedic intake protocols). Model each of the
ten as its own sub-template inside the composite state, using the exact same slot-filling
mechanism from §4 — this is not a new engine, it's the micro layer applied to a different,
larger template registry, populated with an Ayurvedic physician's input rather than a
symptom-branching one.
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 12 / 19
7 Document extraction — what to keep, what to
simplify
v1's instinct on OCR architecture is directionally correct and worth keeping: route printed
text, handwritten text, and mixed-script documents through different specialized paths,
and always flag low-confidence extractions for manual verification rather than let the
system guess. Two changes are worth making before this becomes a build spec.
DON'T SHIP THE V1 BENCHMARK TABLE AS-IS
The precision figures quoted (98.7% CER for Tesseract 5, 89.6% accuracy for a custom CRNN
"trained on IAM + Prescription Corpus," 94.2% CER for the hybrid ensemble, 32.6% exact
match for a named VLM) are presented without a traceable source, and the draft itself is
machine-generated research ("Generated by Kimi" appears on every page). One specific
thing worth checking before repeating any of these: IAM is an English-language Latin-script
handwriting dataset — its relevance to Hindi/regional-script handwritten prescriptions is not
obvious and isn't explained. Don't put these numbers in front of a hospital review board, a
grant committee, or investors until you've either traced them to a real published benchmark
or replaced them with numbers you measured yourself against a real sample of Indian OPD
prescriptions.
Simplify the routing for an MVP
v1's pipeline always runs three parallel classifiers (document type, language, content type)
followed by three parallel OCR paths and a weighted ensemble vote on every document.
That's the right end-state, but it's latency- and cost-wasteful to run unconditionally from
day one. A confidence-gated cascade gets most of the value at a fraction of the compute:
DOCUMENT INGESTION
   │
   ▼
Quick printed-text pass (Tesseract 5 + medical dictionary) — fast, cheap
   │
   ├─ confidence ≥ threshold ──▶ accept, proceed to NER
   │
   └─ confidence < threshold ──▶ route to handwriting / mixed-script path
                                  (only invoked when needed, not by default)
                                       │
                                       ├─ confidence ≥ threshold ──▶ accept
                                       └─ confidence < threshold ──▶ flag for
                                                                     manual
                                                                     verification
Escalate to the full parallel ensemble later, once you have real volume and can justify the
added infrastructure cost with measured accuracy gains — not as the MVP default.
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 13 / 19
Merging into one record
Document extractions and conversational slots write into the same patient record (§8) with
a provenance tag on every value. This is what makes v1's contradiction-flagging idea
("document says diabetic, patient denied in conversation") actually implementable — and
it should be extended one step further: contradictions are surfaced to the physician as a
flagged diff on the consultation screen, never silently auto-resolved by the LLM. The LLM
does not get to decide which source is "true."
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 14 / 19
8 The unified patient-record schema
One object, written to by the macro-FSM, the meso/micro layers, the document pipeline,
and read by the summary generator (Module C). Every value carries its own provenance
and confidence — this is the backbone that makes §4's extraction, §6's AYUSH extension,
and §7's OCR merge all consistent with each other.
{
  "session_id": "sess_8f2a...",
  "clinic_mode": "ayush",         // §6 — "allopathic" | "ayush" | "integrative"
  "macro_state": "HPI",
  "language": "hi-IN",
  "sections": {
    "chief_complaint": {
      "value": "chest pain",
      "category": "pain",                 // drives meso-template selection, §3
      "confidence": 0.97, "source": "conversation"
    },
    "hpi": {
      "template": "SOCRATES",
      "slots": {
        "site":      {"value": "chest",    "confidence": 0.95, "source": "direct"},
        "onset":     {"value": "1_day",    "confidence": 0.91, "source": "direct"},
        "radiation": {"value": "left_arm", "confidence": 0.94, "source": "direct"},
        "dyspnea":   {"value": true, "confidence": 0.81, "source": "opportunistic"},
        "severity":  {"value": null, "confidence": null, "source": null}
      }
    },
    "ayush_assessment": {                  // present only if clinic_mode includes "ayush"
      "prakriti": { "slots": { "...": "..." } },
      "vikriti":  { "slots": { "...": "..." } }
      // ... remaining Dashavidha Pariksha sub-templates, §6
    }
  },
  "document_extractions": [
    {
      "doc_id": "doc_1", "type": "prescription", "ocr_path": "printed",
      "entities": [
        {"field": "pmh.diabetes", "value": true, "confidence": 0.88, "source": 
"document:doc_1"}
      ]
    }
  ],
  "contradictions": [
    {"field": "pmh.diabetes", "conversation_value": false, "document_value": true,
     "status": "unresolved_flag_for_physician"}
  ],
  "red_flags": [],                          // populated by the safety watchdog, §9
  "clinician_notes": []                     // unrecognized_mention text from §4, verbatim
}
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 15 / 19
9 Red-flag architecture — making the three
layers actually agree
v1's "rule-based + ML + LLM triple layer" is the right shape but doesn't specify what
happens when the layers disagree, which is the only question that matters for a safety
system. The fix is a strict authority order, not three equal votes:
Layer
Role
Authority
Rule-based
keyword/threshold
matching, e.g.
chest pain +
dyspnea + severity
≥7
Runs every single
turn, on the full
accumulated slot
set, without
exception
Gating — this layer alone can trigger 
REDFLAG_INTERRUPT . It is deterministic and auditable,
which is what you can defend to a hospital's clinical
safety committee.
ML severity
scorer
fine-tuned clinical
NLP model
Adds nuance for
borderline cases
the rule layer
doesn't catch
Refines triage priority ranking among patients already
in the queue. Cannot suppress a rule-layer flag, and
cannot independently gate an interrupt.
LLM pattern
reasoning
complex multi-
symptom
combinations
Catches patterns
the fixed rule list
didn't anticipate
Must emit an explanation that maps back to a specific
rule/threshold it's proposing to add — never a free-form
clinical judgment. Any LLM-raised flag is treated as a 
candidate rule for the rule layer to also check,
escalated to a human reviewer for confirmation before
it becomes an auto-trigger, not fired directly to the
patient.
DESIGN PRINCIPLE
When any layer disagrees, escalate — take the union of flags, never let a lower-authority
layer suppress a higher one. For a hospital emergency-detection system, the acceptable error
is a false positive that a triage nurse dismisses in ten seconds, not a false negative that
delays care. This is also why the rule layer, not the LLM, has to be the thing standing
between a patient having a cardiac event and getting flagged — an LLM call failing or being
slow should never be a single point of failure for that decision.
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 16 / 19
10 Revised build sequence
v1's four-phase, twelve-month plan is reasonable in scope but sequences voice, AYUSH,
and OCR complexity in alongside the core dialogue logic before that logic has been
validated. Recommend validating the macro/meso/micro architecture itself first, isolated
from every other source of variability:
Phase
Focus
Why this order
0 —
Skeleton
before v1's
Phase 1
Macro-FSM (§2) + 5–8 chief-
complaint templates (§3) in touch-
only, text-only mode, one
allopathic department, no AYUSH, no
voice, no OCR
Validates the clinical branching logic and
slot-filling mechanism against real patients
without ASR noise, translation quality, or
document parsing as confounding
variables
1
Add self-hosted AI4Bharat ASR/TTS
for the pilot's languages (§5, Option
B) + the safety watchdog rule layer
(§9)
Voice is the highest-variance component
(accents, noise, code-switching) —
introduce it once the underlying question
logic is already proven
2
Document OCR pipeline (§7,
confidence-gated cascade, printed-
text path first) + Module C summary
generation + FHIR/HIS push
Matches v1's existing FHIR mapping work,
which is solid and can proceed largely
unchanged
3
AYUSH mode (§6) — Dashavidha
Pariksha templates only,
department-gated, with an
Ayurvedic physician co-designing
every slot
No existing vendor ontology to borrow
from here — this needs dedicated clinical
input time, budget for it explicitly rather
than bundling it into a generic "scale &
refine" phase
4
Full ABDM production gateway,
multilingual expansion, scale-out
Unchanged from v1
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 17 / 19
A Appendix — claim-by-claim critique of the v1
draft
Claim in v1
Assessment
Recommendation
"State Machine + Clinical
Ontology + LLM Router"
— 3-box dynamic
questioning diagram
Correct high-level shape, but no
policy detail: doesn't say how the
next question is chosen, how
free text fills multiple slots, or
how templates differ by
complaint.
Replaced with the explicit macro/
meso/micro hierarchy and turn-loop
mechanics in §2–4, including the exact
LLM I/O contract.
Bhashini as "mandatory
primary" ASR/TTS,
alongside "no patient
data leaves the hospital
network"
Internally inconsistent —
Bhashini is a MeitY-hosted cloud
API; using it means voice audio
leaves the hospital network.
Pick explicitly (§5 callout): self-host
AI4Bharat models for the pilot (true
"no data leaves"), or keep Bhashini
and disclose the data flow in consent
language.
OCR benchmark table:
98.7% CER Tesseract,
89.6% acc custom CRNN
on "IAM + Prescription
Corpus," 32.6% exact
match GLM-OCR
No traceable source given; IAM is
an English/Latin-script dataset of
unclear relevance to Hindi/
regional handwriting. Reads as
generated placeholder data.
Do not present externally until
sourced or replaced with your own
measured pilot numbers (§7).
"JMIR 2026 study"
ROUGE-1/BERTScore
figures for Llama-3-8B vs.
Meditron-7B
Same concern as above —
precise figures without a
verifiable citation trail in the
document.
Verify the primary paper and re-quote
exactly, or state only the qualitative
conclusion (open-weight models are
viable) until verified.
Ashtavidha Pariksha
listed under Module A
(patient-facing
conversation)
Clinically incorrect for most sub-
items — Nadi, Jihva, Sparsha,
Drik require direct physician
examination; a patient cannot
self-report their own pulse
quality.
Move to a physician-facing exam form
in Module C (§6). Keep only
Dashavidha Pariksha in the patient-
facing engine.
"TTS repeats back what
was understood" after
every input
Good for trust, but doing it after
every slot across an 8–12-section
interview conflicts with the doc's
own 5–8 minute target and will
feel tedious.
Confirm-back only for red-flag-relevant
or low-confidence slots (§4, step 9);
silently accept high-confidence routine
answers.
Red-flag "Rule + ML +
LLM triple layer" with no
disagreement policy
Right components, no authority
order — doesn't say what
happens when layers disagree,
which is the only question that
matters for safety.
Rule layer is the sole gate for
interrupts; ML/LLM only refine priority
ranking (§9).
Rasa targets open-domain
chatbot intent/slot-filling; it's a
Build the macro-FSM and meso-
templates as a lightweight custom
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 18 / 19
Dialogue manager tech:
"Python + Rasa / Custom
State Machine"
heavy dependency for a hand-
authored, auditable medical
ontology that needs to be fully
inspectable for clinical safety
review.
service you fully control (§2–4), not a
general chatbot framework.
Document upload always
runs 3 parallel classifiers
+ 3 parallel OCR paths +
ensemble vote
Right end-state, but latency/cost-
wasteful as an MVP default when
most documents are cleanly
printed.
Confidence-gated cascade for the pilot
(§7); escalate to the full parallel
ensemble once volume justifies it.
This document is a design reference to guide implementation planning. It has not been reviewed by a clinician, a
DPDP/legal counsel, or an ABDM-certification body, and none of the specific performance figures, timelines, or
vendor claims in it should be treated as validated until confirmed against primary sources or your own pilot data.
SwasthyaSync — Conversational History-Taking Engine · 19 / 19
